# Gra*fast* Working Group, 24th October 2023

**Agenda:** https://github.com/grafast/wg/blob/main/agendas/2023-10-24.md

1. Confirm agreement
   to[ Grafast contribution agreement](https://github.com/grafast/wg/blob/main/AGREEMENT.md)
2. Introduction of attendees
3. Review agenda
4. ["Global dependencies" proposal](https://github.com/benjie/crystal/issues/505)
5. ["Early exit" proposal](https://github.com/benjie/crystal/issues/405)

**Attendees**

Benjie Gillam  
Jem G  
Pascal Senn  
Lars S Buch-Jepsen  
Ian Stewart  
Teo S  
Mathieu Rochette  

## 3. Review agenda and Overview of the state of Gra*fast* (Benjie)

- It’s worth noting that Grafast was not created in a vacuum, it was a case of
  looking at all the solutions that were out there and building a system that
  would work for all of these use cases in as easy a way as we can manage; for
  example making sure the plan resolvers are in the right shape for programmers
  to write as they shift from a procedural to a declarative style.
- No one has reported any unknown issues since Grafast’s launch on 20th
  September
- Aside from todays items, there’s also “Partial Planning” - stopping the plan
  when you have what you need, especially in the case of polymorphism
- And also “Exportable plans” - exporting as a josn object and storing the plan
  into redis or wherever you want and read it back without doing the expensive
  planning again

## 4. “Global dependencies” proposal (Benjie)

_Reference slide show slides 3 - 5_

Example of fetching the first five posts from a list of top posts.

At the moment, the execute step is told the number of dependencies and we give
it the values of those dependencies. But for the first argument, it is always
the same number - ie five. But the length of the list is always the same, we end
up with say six copies of the number five. We can't necessarily correlate each
id with the limits they use. Really, we want one limit that everything uses. We
can do that by going through the list and checking, but that seems like a lot of
work for the developer and cost for the system.

![Grafast status report - October 2023(1)](https://github.com/grafast/wg/assets/6413628/a4a5354d-260d-4d8c-ad0d-f6102551053c)


Proposed Solutions:

- Check at runtime
- Add a global dependency - which will get the specific value to put into a
  “values” array. This might get awkward as there would be tracking involved
- Make all root level values available to all steps

Any of these solutions may rule out cross request batching? If ten requests come
in all calling the same operation, the initial batch size could be ten. But this
means an input variable might not be the same value for all ten.

Teo - how does the spec relate to the implementation? How should the spec cover
the way the graph is executed, what should it allow?

Benjie - Much like the GraphQL Spec, we would have a similar passage which talks
about calling this execute method. What is inside the execute is down to what
your steps are. But we’re going to talk about how to pass the lists of values
across. This will be a major change to Gra*fast* as it’s currently a tuple of
lists, and that are is what we are discussing changing.

Pascal - Global dependencies would be used only for variables because only these
are global? My question is in the execute step, how to do I know how to get from
root values to what is in the array; how do I know where to look?

Benjie - yes this is part of the problem. In the current JavaScript
implementation, because we pass the `values` tuple through, you know the index
of the variable. So you are responsible for tracking that as part of the
metadata of the step. In TypeScript it might be a property on the instance of
the class (but I don't think we need classes, that’s a whole other
conversation!) If you call `addGlobalDep`, either you know what the key is, or
you know the value isn’t a list but a value directly; but you need to track that
in the step’s state. Because it’s a `step.execute`, you’ll know what the step’s
built up state is.

Pascal - can you give a scalar value instead of an array?

Benjie - Yes I’m proposing we might pass a scalar in. So it could be a tuple of
lists or it’s scalars.

To clarify, this is global variables, but also context and constants too, any
globals really.

Mathieu - could we pass instead of a scalar an object which acts like a list?

Benjie - I’ve ruled it out for now because we want Grafast to be a spec, and
specifying that list-like behavior in every language, even those not as dynamic
as Javascript, might be difficult. I’m happy to receive feedback on that.
Another option is instead of a tuple of lists, it becomes a tuple of objects
where each object contains a list or a scalar. I'd also rather avoid that due to
memory and garbage collection overhead. If you’re tracking it already hopefully
you don't need that data again at runtime.

Benjie - my general sense from everyone is putting scalars into a values list is
not that terrible, so long as we make it clear to expect a special behavior

Pascal - you could have an accessor or delegate so you know the values. But if
you think about it, it is run so often you need to avoid allocation. It could be
a big chunk of memory. But if the spec defines it, the value is just there and
you know how to fetch it, you then have space for optimization, you can
implement it however you want to.

Benjie - yes, it is such a hot path, it’s critical to avoid any unnecessary
allocation. So a tuple of lists means we’re only adding one single small array
which we get rid of again later

Benjie - I’m confident we could use scalars here, thank you everyone.

Teo - is there a reason to not do that move?

Benjie- it was just simplicity. PostGraphile didn’t have that need, which is
where Grafast started from. Now of course it’s a bigger project; but broadly
it’ll be the same for most users, and you can opt in. There is a slight
performance enhancement when using the `rootValues` - because you can create
them once and pass them to every single step without reallocation, but if you
don’t need half the values any more you can’t release them. It is probably
cleaner and clearer to put it into `values`. I’ll experiment with adding it to
`values` and see how it feels.

As for the cross request batching; anything that adds a global dependency can
opt out of the batching, but anything which doesn't use the global deps can
still do a single batch across requests

Pascal - why a tuple of values? Two values or..?

Benje - it’s an n tuple, dependent on how many dependencies you have.

Pascal - In the cloud we talk about the “noisy neighbor” problem, it has a lot
of implications. It’ll be difficult to secure things when you have cross request
batching.

Benjie - Especially when an unexpected error happens and then blows ten requests
instead of one, for example. Hopefully we will handle as many edge cases as
possible, but this feature will be opt-in to help handle that

Pacal - About executing layer by layer; in Fusion we don’t have the planning
model in the execution engine, we execute as far as you can and then the
dataloader is an async step. We go until we’re blocked and then we batch. Then
we resolve again until blocked and then batch again. So we aren’t batching in
layers, a user in one part of the tree and another user further down may get
batched together. But each step in Grafast is an async step?

Benjie - yes a slightly different execution model in Grafast. EG In GraphQL.js
with traditional resolvers, everything races to execute as fast as possible.
Grafast doesn’t work like that, Grafast batches on a per step basis, executing
them in parallel if they’re not dependent on each other, and then moving on and
executing the next layer in parallel

Pascal - So the execution plans are structured similar to in Fusion, we also
don’t have this racing; you know what you batch and it can be more than one

Benjie - yes it's similar, we are reducing latency by doing things more
efficiently in the first place. So yes if you just take your resolvers the
latency might be higher; but if you move to plan resolvers the latency will be
lower.

## 5. “Early Exit” proposal (Benjie)

_Reference slide show slides 6_

![Grafast status report - October 2023](https://github.com/grafast/wg/assets/6413628/d372cd1a-ad00-44ba-84ff-fa3f4ab3ab64)

We want to be able to just say “just stop” in some cases, eg in polymorphism.
The only current way is to throw an error; but there’s nothing for anything
other than an error. Turns out returning `null`, or an empty list, is actually
quite useful. EG We could return an empty array without having to go to the data
source because we already know it’s empty.

How about an “early exit if” statement. It could be a `null`, or an error, or an
empty list etc. Is this effectively an assertion? Or is it a wrapper around a
value?

I’d love to go into more detail and write some code with whoever is interested
but there isn’t time for it today.

This comes down to effectively the design of how the system works - what the
spec should say.

In the “happy case” we already have the lists, but in the early exit case we
would have to filter the values down. Building a new list omitting the ones
which won’t return, and use that list at execution.

Pascal - there is no condition step at the moment. So how do you work around
this already? The early exit could be a condition step. Is there a reason we
don’t have one?

Benjie - conditions make the plans really big and complex - lots of things to do
on the left and right branches. You might think you need conditions everywhere,
but you actually you don't. You would implement conditions in a step itself, and
then based on the resulting value do the next step. It’s a thin wrapper of your
business logic - get the thing, if I have the thing do the thing, otherwise
stop. Other than in polymorphism, there isn’t really a “do two completely
different things” because really it’s a data access language. EG you’ve said
you’re going to return a user and so the question really is “which user is it?”

Pascal - I have an early exit case, in most of the business parts, the service
layer rather than the resolver part. Here, I wonder if I would always use it as
only “early exit” or if there are more complicated cases.

Benjie - yes, please if there is, find a case where early exit isn’t good
enough. I’m pretty sure it won't be an issue for 99.99% of users. You can do
whatever you want in the business layer, behind the execute, but that doesn't
mean we need those things at the planning layer.

Pascal - in the real world, you don’t need to plan every answer, you just eg
want the user you want

Benjie - yes, that’s why I think partial planning is a big need. If we do that
root-level understanding of the derivatives, we can extract from the identifier
what types we need. If a new type comes along, we can plan it then. At the
moment we do all that planning up front but we shouldn't. We need that partial
planning.

Pascal - the problem is you plan anyway. Even if you don't specify the fragment.

Benjie - What I’m saying is you shouldn’t need to plan a child selection set. In
many cases, you can know it at the right time. If you have a list of polymorphic
things, that itself is not a polymorphic step, it’s a step that returns a bunch
of polymorphic objects. When you get each of the polymorphic objects you can see
which types they are, you then know which of the selection sets need planning.

## Conclusions

Benjie - For global dependencies we’ll add it to the `values`; we’ll add a
special method called global dependency

Benjie - For early exit, please think about what the different ways of using
this might be and find out if there are any exceptions where you need branching.
There are “sub-procedures” used in a couple of places but they are in a weakened
state, not particularly formal. But I’m not convinced they’re needed, please
have a think of any examples

Pascal - I will check where we use branching in Fusion. Is there an ad hoc step?

Benjie - a lambda step to pass in anything

Pascal - there’s a lot of SQL steps–

Benjie - yes the SQL steps shouldn’t be in the Grafast docs, that should be in
the PostGraphile documentation. `dataplan-pg `is going to move too because I
want to separate that. Anyone who implements Grafast, won't be expected to
implement those.

One of the things we encourage is writing your own step classes. This is one of
the reasons we should move the dataplan stuff out of the Grafast docs as it
obstructed what we want Grafast users to do - anywhere you should write a
dataloader is where you should write a step class

Pascal - I agree. Instead of writing resolvers, or maybe we map them
automatically, you write more of these “in the middle” step classes. It should
be really simple. We already have execution tasks and steps in Hot Chocolate, I
need to see how we can wire them up into the planning. I’m interested to see how
we can optimize the .NET type system of this. We autogenerate dataloaders at the
moment, maybe we can do something similar with step classes.

Teo - what's the best place to look for step classes? Concrete examples etc?

Benjie - everything should be in Grafast docs
[[https://grafast.org/grafast/step-library/standard-steps/](https://grafast.org/grafast/step-library/standard-steps/)]
there aren’t good examples at the moment, you ‘d need to export a postgrphile
schema and look at that. I think there’s one “friends and family” example which
is worth looking at
[[https://github.com/graphile/crystal/tree/main/grafast/website/examples/users-and-friends](https://github.com/graphile/crystal/tree/main/grafast/website/examples/users-and-friends)]

Teo - Hasura are speaking about data plain as well, is there any common ground?

Benjie - no I don't know about that I’m afraid

Thank you very much everyone, we will do another meeting, reach out on discord
or open a github discussion.
