# Gra*fast* Working Group, 25th June 2024

**Agenda:** https://github.com/grafast/wg/blob/main/agendas/2024-06-25.md

1. Confirm agreement
   to [Grafast contribution agreement](https://github.com/grafast/wg/blob/main/AGREEMENT.md)
2. Introduction of attendees
3. Status update
4. Partial planning for Polymorphism
5. Exportable plans for efficiency/caching
6. [Eradicating eval](https://github.com/graphile/crystal/issues/2060)

**Attendees**

Benjie Gillam  
Maik Diepenbroek  
Teo S  
Ian Stewart  

**Apologies**

Jem G  

## 3. Status Update (Benjie) 

Since the last working group in September 2023, global dependices and early exit have both been addressed. 

**Global dependencies**  

[See last WG for an overview of the problem](https://github.com/grafast/wg/blob/68ae0d3f2d363a8949d2d1b63a4650ecc1077297/notes/2023-10-24.md#4-global-dependencies-proposal-benjie)  
The solution has been reached: "unary" values  
If Gra*fast* knows there will always be _exactly one value for a step_, then that step will be a "unary" step. 
Arguments, variables, and context are always unary. 

**Early exit**  

[See last WG for an overview of the problem](https://github.com/grafast/wg/blob/68ae0d3f2d363a8949d2d1b63a4650ecc1077297/notes/2023-10-24.md#5-early-exit-proposal-benjie)    
The solution is a new step: `inhibitOnNull()`  
`$a = inhibitOnNull($b)`: if `$b` is null then anything that depends on `$a` will automatically be null (and won't be evaluated).  
`assertNotNull($b)`: raises an exception if `$b` is null (thereby preventing future steps executing).  
`$b = trap($a, TRAP_INHIBITED, { valueForInhibited: "EMPTY_LIST" })` copies `$a` unless it's inhibited, in which case it becomes `[]`.  
This could also, in theory, trap errors - though there is a bug in this at the moment. Internally, we re-wrote how errors and nulls are handled - we now
use bit masks to flag the values in the system to flag if they are an error, null, inhibited or not.  
By default, nulls are accepted but errors and inhibited values are not; Trap can be configured to accept the different flags.

**Error handling has evolved**

Grafast had had 5 major rewrites, many ways of handling errors. We now track errors via a bit in the bitmask. Errors can now be any value, and determining 
if something is an error is a bitwise operation.  

Error handling was inconsistent (and potentially incoherent). Errors can now be `trap()`'d, making error handling for more consistent.  

**Misc Updates**

- New `polymorphicBranch()` step. [See https://grafast.org/grafast/step-library/standard-steps/polymorphicBranch](https://grafast.org/grafast/step-library/standard-steps/polymorphicBranch
). 
- New `sideEffect()` step. Essentially the same as `lambda()` but expected to make side effects.   
- `loadOne()` and `loadMany()` are faster: Replaced `setTimeout(cb, 0)` with `process.nextTick(cb)` which massively improved throughput.  
- New `nodeIdFromNode()` helper  
- `grafast.hooks` is now middleware   
- `$step.get(fieldName)` default introduced  
- `execute()` signature has changed - see [err.red/gev2](https://err.red/gev2)   
- `grafast()` signature has changed - all options are accepted via configuration object now rather than additional parameters (older method has 
been deprecated but still supported)  

## 4. Partial planning for Polymorphism (Benjie)

Planning of polymorphism can be expensive as every possible type is enumerated and planned, including any polymorphic child fields, resulting in
polymorphic planning becomming a significant undertaking. The current recommendation is to only use Grafast with persisted operations (trusted
documents) to mitigate this planning, plus there's a planning timeout.  

The proposed solution is to plan up to the boundary of the polymorphism and stop (and plan the rest of the document), then at runtime work out
which polymorphic fields actually need to be planned. This planning can be at runtime and then executed as a subplan. If there's a new polymorphic
field requested, it can also be planned at that time.  


## 5. Exportable plans for efficiency/caching (Benjie)

Planning can be expensive but it only needs to happen once, so we could store the result of the planning and use it in the future.  We want to add an
additional lifecycle method eg JSON which is serializable so it can be output and stored somewhere to then be read from a store later on. This could
be done after the 1.0 release. Plans can only be cached if every step class supports the new method.  

Maik: Is this expensive?

Benjie: You only export the plans if you want to. Normally, you go from tree-shake to finalize. For example, if your queries are expensive, you can store the
plans to something like Redis and just pull in the plan when needed which increases efficiency.

## 6. Eradicating eval (Benjie)

_See [https://github.com/graphile/crystal/issues/2060](https://github.com/graphile/crystal/issues/2060)_  

Now we have unary batch steps, we don't need to use eval any more. Eval introduces branching in the plans and we want to avoid this due to its expense. 
However, eval is baked into the way PostGraphile works ontop of Grafast, and on the way argument planning is handled. So this will be a huge rewrite, 
by slowly deprecating eval bit-by-bit overtime as each part of the system is tackled. This means 1.0 can be released before fully removing eval. 
However, we should still plan around this to make sure that removing eval is viable: eg in the PostGraphile filter plugin, lists, etc, which are heavy
on the planning side.  

## 7. Other items (Benjie)

- Formalize "subprocedures"  
- Are classes the right abstraction?  

**Subprocedures**  

For performaing a number of steps within a step. This can be complex at planning time. Potential solution: Create a "subprocedure" plan. Set up subprocedure; run all steps in it; tear it back down and feed the result into the parent plan. This already exists for `listTransform` and `applyTransforms`.  

**Are classes the right abstraction?**

If plans can be serializable for the export/import function described earlier, perhaps they should be represented as state objects
and related behaviors rather than directly as class instances?  
The `proxy()` step also "does some weird stuff", and wrapping steps with other steps (for example the `trap()` or `inhibitOnNull()` steps) can break
inlining, resulting in additional roundtrips to your business logic/data sources. 


## Conclusions

From Zoom chat:   
Teo:	No comment on my end but incredible to see so much progress for Grafast!  
Ian:	same here, nice to see progress!  

Benjie: Thank you, these are complex problems and it has taken me a long time to solve. These future problems - eradicating eval and partial planning - 
promise to also be challenging, but we will get there! Once Grafast is finished it will be an execellent planning system for GraphQL APIs no matter 
what data sources it uses. 

Maik: Do you have any pointers to get started to help?

Benjie: Anything which helps me get through the rest of the work I do is also helpful. Testing and finding issues is also useful. On GitHub we use
the label "Help Wanted" for signposting. There is also the ["V5 board" - a project board on GitHub](https://github.com/orgs/graphile/projects/3). In particular, 
the columns Docs Improvments and Test Improvements are good places to look to help. 

Teo: We are looking at integrating Grafast into our projects soon, no news yet but we will feedback how it goes.   

Benjie: Amazing, thank you. Do remember at this point to use persisted operations. Thank you everyone, catch you next time, or [on our Discord](https://discord.gg/graphile). 